Abstract of the Project *
The project/device has been named "Hridita". ('Hri' from "Hriday" which means heart in Hindi and 'Ta' from "Taapmaan" which means temperature in Hindi). The device is composed of 2 sensors (MAX30100 and MLX90614), 2 Node-MCU, breadboard and few jumper wires. The main purpose of this device is used to track SpO2 level and temperature of an individual. This device is very useful in current pandemic situation as today it has become very important to keep track of our blood oxygen level and temperature. The device has been designed such that it sends warnings if any abnormality is found like fall in SpO2 level or rise in body temperature. An individual is just required to keep his/her fingertip on the sensor for the measurement. The data is then displayed on the screen and if required the data can be stored and uploaded to cloud. The device is also cost effective so that it can reach to mass of people.
Summary of the Project *
The device reads the SpO2 level and temperature of an individual and displays on the screen. If the abnormality is found in reading like if SpO2 level is low or temperature is high then the buzzer starts buzzing i.e it starts giving warnings.
Methodology in detail *
This project consist of two sensors MAX30100 and MLX90614. The purpose of MAX30100 is to measure bpm (beats per minute) and SpO2 level and the purpose of MLX90614 is to measure temperature by flashing codes in the associated micro-controller boards. The device has two LEDs, one emitting a red light, another emitting infrared light. It turns out, oxygenated blood absorbs more infrared light and passes more red light while deoxygenated blood absorbs red light and passes more infrared light. By detecting the IR rays, we can perceive the temperature range. The MLX90614 thermometer sensor works using this principle. The micro-controller board used is Node-MCU, so that if required then data can be sent over the cloud by simply providing Wi-Fi connection to board else the data can be stored and displayed in local machine.
Please upload any required images related to the methodology (such as drawings, circuit diagrams etc.)
Image
complete.png
Image
schematics.png
Image
block.png
Expected social relevance/ benefit of the project *
This project is very helpful seeing the current pandemic situation. The device is easy to install and cost effective. The device has been designed mainly keeping in mind that the device can be easily set up in village areas where proper hospitals are not present. This device can help people in getting early warnings of many diseases including COVID-19.
